---
title: GIDS Conference 2024 - Takeaways on 26th April
date: 2024-05-13 10:00:00 +0530
categories: [JavaScript, Database, Server]
tags: []
toc: true
published: true
mermaid: true
math: true
image:
    path: /assets/img/gids-1/gids-conference-thumbnail.jpg
    alt: Photo of the GIDS Stage during 25th April's Keynote
---


## Overview

The [Great International Developer Summit](https://developersummit.com/) (GIDS) 2024 took place from 23rd to
26th April at IISc Bangalore, featuring over 150 tech talks with some well-known speakers.
Sponsored by leading tech firms, including D.E. Shaw India, my workplace, the conference provided a fantastic
learning experience. I had a blast learning new concepts and networking with the speakers when I attended on the
25th and 26th.

This blog post is a documentation of my takeaways from the talks on 26th April. You can find the 25th April's
post [here]({% post_url 2024-05-03-GIDS-2024-1 %}).

All of the talks are now uploaded to SaltMarch. I've linked the corresponding videos under each talk.

## Talks

### Digital Modernization through accessibility - Scott Davis

Watch: [https://developersummit.com/session/digital-modernization-through-accessibility](https://developersummit.com/session/digital-modernization-through-accessibility)

Scott's keynote talk was a compelling argument to make accessibility a part of product design decisions.
While the takeaways I've documented capture the essence of his presentation, they don't fully convey
the impact it had. 

1. **Accessibility is more than just addressing disability; it's about giving users different means of accessing technology.**
    While we already interact with smartphones through sight, hearing, and touch, ture accessiblity means
    ensuring that everyone, regardless of their abilities, can use your product.
2. **Big Tech is radically re-defining how we interact with technologies.** Some interesting examples are,
    user interactions on the Apple Vision Pro, and double tap gesture on Apple Watch 9. Most of Gen Z
    watches videos with subtitles or closed captions.
3. Products should be designed with universal accessibility in mind. **While the Web is inherently**
    **designed to be accessible, it's often the practices of web developers that cripple it.** When used correctly,
    HTML adheres to Web Content Accessiblity Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 guidelines, which lays down the standards for
    web accessiblity. It's necessary to give users options to engage with content using all senses such as
    subtitles, closed captions, and alt text.
4. In addition to the accessibility guidelines, the web offers APIs such as the Web Speech API and Screen
    Reader APIs, which can be integrated with a few lines of code. Despite the availability of such tools
    to create accessible products, **there is still a need for a shift in mindset regarding accessibility.**

### Evolutionary Architectures - Rebecca Parsons

Watch: [https://developersummit.com/session/evolutionary-architectures](https://developersummit.com/session/evolutionary-architectures)

This talk by Rebecca Parsons stressed the importance of evolutionary architectures, advocating for
practices like evolutionary database design and contract testing to enable flexibility and
incremental evolution of systems.

1. **System architectures need to be designed to handle unforeseen changes,**
    which are common in the wild. Examples include the rise of iPhone in the 2000s, frequent shifts in security and
    regulatory policies, and the rapid evolution of language features.
1. **Evolutionary architecture supports guided, incremental change across multiple dimensions.**
    * Make incremental changes to a system to support an evolutionary change.
    * Incremental changes should be guided by fitness functions that validate how well a system
        meets the requirements.
    * Guided incremental changes can only be enabled by rigorous automation in the form of
        Continuous Delivery.
1. Systems should be architected, developed, and tested for evolvability. Confident incremental changes
    accrue over time to sweeping evolutions of the software. Evolutionary architectures allow changes to specific parts
    of the system without disrupting others.
    * **Defer design decisions until the last responsible moment** to ensure that you have all the necessary
        information. Don't predict future evolutions.
    * **You can't evolve your code if you don't understand it.** Make the system automated, testable and
        maintainable.
    * Follow Postel's Law - **Be liberal in what you accept, and conservative in what you send.** Accept user
        inputs in all possible ways so that the system can evolve in response to external changes.


### Design Trade-offs in Modern Architectures - Venkat Subramaniam

Watch: [https://developersummit.com/session/design-trade-offs-in-modern-architectures](https://developersummit.com/session/design-trade-offs-in-modern-architectures)

This was an entertaining talk by Venkat highlighting how software architects and developers should approach
non-functional requirements in software design.

1. **The requirements of any system are divided into functional and non-functional.**
    Functional requirements are explicitly stated by the users as business needs, whereas non-functional
    requirements -- such as security, scalability, and performance -- are characteristics of the system that
    are implicitly understood to be necessary, often not directly specified by users.
1. **A system can't fulfill all non-functional characteristics, as some may inherently conflict with**
    **each other.** Developers must collaborate with business to determine what's adequate for the problem.
    For instance, developers might choose to write imperative code in C++ to achieve high performance, but the complex
    codebase leads to poor maintainability in the long run, especially when optimal performance wasn't a user
    requirement.
1. There's usually a misconception in the understanding of monoliths and microservices,
    * **Monoliths are often _distributed_ systems with mutliple independent pieces (separate database, application, and UI services),**
      **but they require a single or synchronized deployment.**
    * Microservices support independent deployments at the cost of higher complexity and coordination. If you
      have microservices which need coordinated deployment, they are not microservices.
    * Microservices are not required to be micro, but they are focussed on solving a defined subset of the domain.
1. **The job of a system architect is to evaluate and balance these design trade-offs.** Think of non-functional
    requirements not as switches to turn on, but as dials that are interconnected. 
    * Work with users to understand what's really adequate. **Don't ask them whether they need consistency,**
      **ask them what they need more: consistency or availability.**
    * Performance is never about speed, it's about whether it's adequate. Performance optimizations that
      are necessary in a missile guidance software are often overkill in a food ordering app.
    * You can either get high scalability or high performance, but not both at a reasonable cost.

### Design Principles for Better Frontend Code - Venkat Subramaniam

Watch: [https://developersummit.com/session/design-principles-for-better-frontend-code](https://developersummit.com/session/design-principles-for-better-frontend-code)

As we were approaching the end of the conference, Venkat's talk covered high level principles and practices to write
maintainable JavaScript code.

1. Following are common software principles to follow for a good design, especially for frontend code,
    * **High cohesion and low coupling.** Keep functionally related code tightly coupled, while ensuring that unrelated code remains loosely coupled.
    * **Single Responsibility Principle.** Each piece of code should have a single reason to change. This is only possible with
        high cohesion.
    * However, when these principles are used incorrectly, it can lead to unnecessary complexity.
1. Some JavaScript pitfalls to be mindful of,
    * Always use `===` instead of `==` to prevent type coercion issues.
    * Prefer `const` or `let` over `var` to avoid potential code design problems caused by hoisting.
    * Minimize the use of global variables to prevent unintended side effects.
1. **Functional programming style lets you understand what the code is doing by just reading what's necessary.**
    Imperative code gives you all the details, but requires that you read through the entire code to understand
    what it's doing. For functional style to be effective, keep the code at a single level of abstraction. Anything
    at lower levels of abstraction should be delegated instead of implemented.
    * Imperative style code:
        ```js
        const numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10];
        const result = 0;
        for (int i = 0; i < numbers.length; i++) {
            if ((numbers[i] % 2) === 0) {
                result += (numbers[i] * 2);
            }
        }
        console.log(result);
        ```
    * Functional style code:
        ```js
        const numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10];
        const result = numbers
                        .filter((item) => item % 2 === 0)
                        .map((item) => item * 2)
                        .reduce((acc, item) => acc + item);
        console.log(result);
        ```
    * Function style code with single level of abstraction:
        ```js
        const isEven = (num) => num % 2 === 0; // Delegated the operations to separate functions.
        const double = (num) => num * 2;
        const add = (a, b) => a + b;

        const numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10];
        const result = numbers.filter(isEven).map(double).reduce(add);
        console.log(result);
        ```

### Pattern Matching in Java - Venkat Subramaniam

Watch: [https://developersummit.com/session/pattern-matching-in-java](https://developersummit.com/session/pattern-matching-in-java)

This final talk of the day covers the different pattern matching features now available in Java. Since it
was mostly driven by examples, I really recommend checking out the full video if you're interested.

1. `switch` in Java has been historically used with statements (and break), but now there's support for
    switch expressions. Statements are inherently more error-prone and difficult to understand since they
    force mutation. Returning a value, in functional style, is better than mutating a return variable.
    * Switch with statements,
        ```java
        switch(score): {
            case 10:
                grade = "A";
                break;
            case 9:
                grade = "A";
                break;
            case 8:
                grade = "B";
                break;
            default:
                grade = "F";
        }
        ```
    * Switch expressions,
        ```java
        var grade = switch(score) {
            case 10, 9 -> "A";
            case 8 -> "B";
            default -> "F";
        }
        ```
1. When using switch expressions, the compiler ensures that the switch is handling all possible values. Prefer not
    adding a default case, so that when any new possible value is added (In case of say enums), the developer is forced to update
    the switch expression to handle it.
1. Pattern matching with instanceof was an intermediate step to enable switch expressions on objects. Pattern matching
    is for data oriented programming, whereas Polymorphism is for object oriented programming.
    ```java
    // Pattern matching with instanceof
    if (input instanceof String str) {
        System.out.println("input is automatically casted to String! - " + str.length());
    }

    // Switch expressions with pattern matching
    switch(input) {
        case Integer i -> System.out.println("input is an integer");
        case Double d -> System.out.println("input is a double");
        default -> System.out.println("doesn't matter");
    }
    ``` 
1. Finally, switch expressions really shine with pattern matching on records, especially with guarded pattern matching.
    ```java
    sealed interface Trade {}
    record Sell(String stock, int quantity) implements Trade {}
    record Buy(String stock, int quantity) implements Trade {}

    public String process(Trade trade) {
        switch(trade) {
            case Sell sell when sell.quantity() >= 5000 -> "Sell needs approval!";
            case Sell sell -> "Selling " + sell.quantity() + " of " + sell.ticker();
            case Buy(String t, int q) -> "Buying " + q + " of " + t;
        }
    }
    ```